Example: How to train a dog to touch a doorknob with its nose.

You will need a reinforcer which can be presented very quickly when the
behavior is emitted. A conditioned reinforcer is most convenient, for example,
an auditory stimulus such as the sound of a dime-store noisemaker or
“cricket.” Condition the dog by sounding the cricket just before tossing a
small piece of food into a dish. Repeat until the dog goes to the dish as
soon as the cricket sounds.

You could condition the desired response by waiting until the dogs nose
touched the knob and then reinforcing, but you might have to wait a long
time. To avoid this, shape (or cliﬂerentiate) the behavior. At first, reinforce
any response remotely related to the ﬁnal form. For example, the dog may
be sitting still, and it will never touch the knob doing that. Therefore,
reinforce any slight movement by sounding the toy cricket as soon as the dog
moves, tossing asmall scrap of food into the dish. (The advantage of an
auditory conditioned reinforcer is that it reaches the dog instantly no matter
where the dog is looking.) When the dog is moving about, reinforce move-
ments in the general direction of the door and withhold reinforcements for
movements in any other direction (diﬁerential reinforcement). Gradually
shape the behavior of moving closer to the door and then closer to the knob.
Then reinforce bringing the head closer to the knob. Finally deliver a rein-
forcement only when the dog is touching the knob with its nose. This gradual
shifting of the criterion of differential reinforcement is known as successive
approximation. The entire process should take only a few minutes.

Although the goal is to get the dogs nose to touch the doorknob, a large
pattern of behavior is strengthened byreinforcement. The dog must approach
the door, assume a particular posture, and so on. The various elements of
the total response must all be conditioned in the shaping process.

If we now want to condition a differentresponse, a first response may be  

a help or a hindrance, depending on  whether the two responses share
common elements.  

